
This argument, it will be perceived, would be addressed with much fitness
to men, whose error, in relation to the Sabbath, leaned to the side of an
over-strained and impracticable severity; and who had just been urging it
as a complaint against our Lord’s disciples, that, in passing through a
field on the Sabbath-day, they had relieved their hunger by plucking a
few ears of corn.  These cavillers are reminded, therefore, that, in the
economy of salvation, all outward ordinances are to be viewed in the
light of things secondary and subservient; their mode of observance to be
interpreted in harmony with the ends for which they were ordained; and
that, with regard to the Sabbath especially, care must be taken to avoid
both the hypocrisy that would make the day to be honoured by a rigid
ceremonial exactness, and the presumption that would overlook its eternal
sanctity as standing in the will of God.  It is in this last view that
all the ordinances of religion, when clearly of Divine appointment,
acquire a character of deep and momentous interest.  Their foundation is
in the will of God; but that will, as we know, has, as its ever-guiding
and controlling rule, a sacred regard to the highest interests of man.
Nothing can be more dishonouring to God, or more untrue, than to speak of
outward ordinances as if they were mere arbitrary appointments, without
significance and without benefit, as only so many meaningless enactments
designed to test the willingness of human subjection; so far otherwise,
they are means framed upon a wise and loving regard to all the aptitudes
of our moral nature, and calculated, in their reverent use, to help man
through all the difficulties of his course and to educate his immortal
spirit for the employments of the world to come.  _The Sabbath was_ MADE
FOR MAN.

Brethren, you are aware of the reasons which induce me, at the hazard of
going over much of familiar argument, formally to review the grounds on
which we hold that a PROPER MORAL SANCTITY does attach to the CHRISTIAN
SABBATH:—that the institution itself has an origin, an object, a typical
significance and value, which are independent of all economies, and will
endure to all time; and, therefore, that any nation which shall presume
to tamper with its unalterable sacredness, is drawing down upon itself
those awful maledictions which, by an undesigned coincidence, have been
so often recited in our ears this morning as the just retribution of
POLLUTED SABBATHS. {5}

I.  In trying to arrive at correct notions upon what may be due to the
sacred day, and how far it may be lawful that churches and places of
amusement should share its hours between them, our first thoughts are
naturally directed to the Old Testament accounts of the Sabbath
institution itself.  Was its origin paradisaical, or patriarchal, or
Levitical?  And if it were either of these, were the reasons given for
commencing it such as would pass away, when the dispensation under which
it was given passed away?  This question is important, because there is a
current way of speaking of the Sabbath as if it were a mere festival of
the Jewish Church, deriving its whole sanctity from the Levitical law,
and only taken up by the Christian Church at second hand,—as among the
_useful_ things of the old economy which it would be as well to
perpetuate, though not one of the _binding_ things we were under any
obligation to observe.

Now, to expose the absurdity of this notion, we have only to take the
earliest Scripture notices of the institution which come to hand.  In the
second chapter of the book of Genesis, at the close of the account of the
creation, we read,—_And on the seventh day God ended his work which He
had made_; _and He rested on the seventh day from all his work which He
had made_.  _And God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it_: BECAUSE
_that in it He had rested from all his work which God created and made_.
If this passage stood alone, one conclusion only could be drawn from it;
namely, that the institution of the Sabbath succeeded the creation
immediately in order of time, and that it was sanctified for reasons
which must be binding on all mankind alike.  But other notices in the
writings of Moses follow, which might seem to militate against this view,
and even to favour the erroneous notion I have adverted to, of the
Sabbath having only a temporary or dispensational sanctity.  Thus, in the
thirty-first chapter of Exodus, we read,—_Wherefore the children of
Israel shall keep the Sabbath throughout their generations for a
perpetual covenant_: _it is a_ SIGN _between me and the children of
Israel for ever_.  Whilst, further, in the book of Deuteronomy, at the
fifth chapter, we find Moses exhorting the people to the observance of
the holy day, with this added reason: _Remember that thou wast a servant
in the land of Egypt_, _and that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence
through a mighty hand and stretched-out arm_; THEREFORE _the Lord thy God
commanded thee to keep the Sabbath-day_.  Now, whether we are able to
give any satisfactory account of these additional reasons for the
institution or not, the revealed fact will remain the same,—namely, that
the Sabbath was _not_ Levitical in its origin, and was not even _first_
made known to the Jews, at the giving of the law.  Nothing can be plainer
than that the Sabbath was both known and observed before the Jewish
Church had any existence.  For, besides the incidental notices both
before and after the deluge,—such as Noah sending out the dove again
“after other seven days,”—we find the Jews actually keeping a Sabbath in
the wilderness of Sin, before the covenant of Sinai had been entered
into.  Thus, at the giving of the manna, we have Moses saying unto the
people, _To-morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord_: _on
that day ye shall not find it in the field_: _for the Lord hath given you
the Sabbath_: _therefore He giveth you on the sixth day the bread of two
days_:—language plainly implying that, at that time, the Sabbath was an
established observance of the religious life.  What shall we say, then,
of those _subsequent_ reasons for the institution which connect it with a
peculiar national covenant? or with the deliverance of the Israelites
from bondage?  Why, not that they are meant to be reasons for the
institution _itself_, but reasons for a particular time and form of its
_re-promulgation_.  The children of Israel, it is to be remembered, had
been for several hundred years under captivity in Egypt.  Many of their
ordinances, it is likely they would have forgotten; and their Sabbaths,
it is all but certain, their task-masters would not permit them to
observe.  On their Exodus, therefore, it became necessary that there
should be a formal _re-enactment_ of the holy day; not only by a
repetition of those moral considerations, on account of which the
Almighty had originally set it apart, but also with a recital of such
other arguments as should make the sanctity of the day especially binding
upon _them_ as a nation; namely, that in their revived and perpetuated
Sabbath, they were to keep up a grateful commemoration of their
deliverance from Egypt, as well as behold a standing pledge or seal of
the covenant into which God was then entering with his people.  To infer
that mankind had never observed a day of sanctified rest until the
Sabbath was made a sign of the covenant with Moses, would be as
unreasonable as the inference that the sun’s light had never been
refracted in the rain-drops, until God set his “bow in the clouds,” to be
a sign of his covenant with Noah.  It pleased God to take an existing
moral fact in the one case, as He had taken an existing physical fact in
the other, to be a perpetual and visible memorial of his own gracious
purposes.  And, surely, to the Israelites, in all ages, it must have been
a great encouragement to see the promise made unto their fathers
guaranteed by a seal, which was honoured as the first token ever made to
human kind, and hallowed by considerations which could never change, and
never lose their force.

I say never lose their force;—for what could a sanctified commemoration
of the rest of the Great Creator, a commanded acknowledgment, from the
creatures He had made, of their subjection and dependence, a periodical
pause in their other employments that they might hallow and bless his
name,—what, I say, could such reasons for an institution have to do with
one age more than another, or with one economy more than another?
Plainly, the obligation presses equally on the first man Adam, and the
last born of his degenerate sons.  In this respect, the Sabbath was not
made for Noah and the patriarchs specially, to commemorate the world’s
second birth; nor for Moses and the Israelites specially, to celebrate
the triumphs of the wilderness and the sea.  It was made neither for Jew,
nor Christian, nor Church, nor age;—_The Sabbath was made_ FOR MAN.

II.  Other reasons for the original and indelible sanctity of this
institution, I must note more briefly.  Thus, what other inference can be
drawn from its place in the law of the ten commandments,—that great
summary of human duty,—that searching code which, in its Gospel
spirituality and breadth, becomes the rule of all outward and inward
holiness; that eternal transcript of all creature obedience, which, when
heaven and earth shall have passed away, shall stand out as the reflected
will of God?  _Think not_, said the Great Teacher, _I am come to destroy
the law or the prophets_, _I am not come to destroy but to fulfil_.  Will
any raise a question as to the law here intended being the moral law
given to Moses? or conceding that, will they say that when our Lord
declared neither _jot nor tittle_ should pass from this law, He meant to
say, _men shall keep all the commandments except the fourth_?

Again, in contending for the universal obligation to separate a seventh
portion of our time to the service of God, we cannot overlook the plain
intimations contained in the earliest records of all nations, that,
either with religious sanctions or without them, men have observed this
_weekly_ division of time.  Chaldeans, Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans, all
seem to have known of it;—and the question is how, except as the relic of
some universal tradition, those nations should have thought of such a
measurement of time at all?  For other divisions of time we can find
reasons,—obvious, necessary, and natural.  The daily rotation of the
earth on its axis; the completed cycle of lunar phases; the sun imparting
to the revolving worlds the blessings of cold and heat, summer and
winter, seed-time and harvest, are phenomena quite adequate to explain
why we should break up our life into _days_, and _months_, and _years_;
but for WEEKS we have _no_ such reason, nor, indeed, _any_ reason to
give, except that it is one of the original appointments and laws of God.
It is an arbitrary period, the recurrence of which neither nature nor
reason seems, in any way, to have marked out for us, but which, on the
all-commanding authority of revelation, men have been taught to set apart
to sacred remembrances.  _The Sabbath was_ MADE _for man_.

III.  Thus, as far as our limits would permit, I think it has been shown
that, irrespective of dispensations, or Churches, or particular
covenants, God did appoint it as an ordinance for the whole human family,
that every recurring seventh day of their life should be separated to
religious uses.  He first “_blessed_” the day, that is, pledged himself
to be propitious to the service which, in spirit and in truth, men should
offer Him on that day; and then “_hallowed_” it, or, as the word is,
“_set it apart_,” intimating that anything opposed or foreign to such
religious service, was to be strictly forbidden.  If this ground have
been made good, I shall be less careful to adduce all that could be said
in favour of the next question which might be raised; namely, on the
supposition that God has made this claim upon all men of a seventh
portion of their time, is _that_ seventh which has been set apart by the
Christian Church the _right_ seventh; in other words, have we sufficient
reason for believing that the change of day, from the _last_ day of the
week to the _first_, is agreeable to the will of God?  Now the only
reasons, it would seem, which could justify such change, must be found
either in an express revelation, or in the ascertained practice of those,
who having for three years had the Lord of the Sabbath to guide them,
must have known on what day He designed it should thenceforth be kept.  A
change of the actual day, it has been conjectured, from some expressions
in the history, was made by Moses, at the time of the Exodus,
transferring the holy day to that which first saw _Israel’s redemption
from bonds_,—what should hinder that, with sufficient authority, a change
should not be made, again transferring our Sabbath to the day which, in
the resurrection of the Son of God, saw the _redemption of the spiritual
Israel from the grave_?  Besides, an avowed end of the Jewish Sabbath was
as a protest against false religions.  The pious Israelite was
distinguished from the idolaters among whom he dwelt, by his close
observance of the sacred day:—why may not our Lord have ordained a change
in the Sabbath of the Christian, as a protest against the continuing
obstinacy of the Jew?  Of course, these are no more than conjectures, and
though sustained by names of great weight, they leave the fact to be
judged of only as we should judge of all other facts; namely, by a
reasonable and sufficient amount of historic evidence.  And this we are
thought to have, even in the scattered notices found in the sacred
narrative itself,—in the frequent allusions to religious meetings on the
first day of the week, in the choice of this day by our Lord for two
successive manifestations to his disciples, in the selection of it for
the first miraculous effusion of the Holy Spirit, in the special mention
of it by Paul as that on which he preached the Word and administered the
sacraments, in the directions given to the Churches of Galatia and
Corinth to lay by their alms that they might make an offering of them to
God on the first day of the week,—all passages proving, as clearly as
anything can, that, among the New Testament Christians, a character of
separation and sacredness was attached to the _first_ day, which was not
accorded to any other.

To these revealed notices is to be added the testimony of other
authorities, which, however lightly we might esteem them on any question
of _doctrine_, are quite competent to give their witness on a matter of
_fact_.  Such, for example, are the well-known letters of the younger
Pliny, the universal consent of our Ecclesiastical historians, and the
constantly recurring allusions to the day by all the Apostolic Fathers,
under the familiar and apparently well-understood designation of THE
LORD’S-DAY.  These proofs seem to bear out the conclusion that, from the
very morning of the Lord’s resurrection, the first day of the week came
to be held of the Christian world in all sanctity and reverence as the
ordained Gospel Sabbath.  And as we may be quite sure that the apostles
would never have made such a change on their own responsibility, we
naturally refer it to some express though unpreserved direction from Him,
who, repudiating all unnatural and constrained austerity on the one hand,
and yet having regard to the unchanging sanctity of moral ordinances on
the other, declared, _The Sabbath was made for man_, _and not man for the
Sabbath_.

IV.  And now, brethren, I come to the practical application of our
subject, in the apprehended overthrow of all that is dear to a Christian
mind by the opening of a great public exhibition on the Lord’s-day.  It
is a topic which I approach with much pain, not a little heightened by a
fear lest strong feeling should betray me into any infirmity—into any
word or sentiment inconsistent with the meekness and gentleness of
Christ.  But I have prayed to be kept from this—have asked of God that I
might nothing exaggerate, nothing represent unfairly, nothing set down in
the spirit of an ill-tempered and scolding partisan—but rather that,
speaking in sorrow more than in anger, I might win _you_ to pray against
this threatened evil—to pray against it as you would against the
pestilence, or other feared providential scourge.  This will not in any
degree lead to a slackened diligence in the use of outward means, as you
perceive from the first step I have invited you to take, in memorializing
Her Majesty’s responsible advisers against this first step to a new “Book
of Sports.”  But still, remember, the thing to be done is to open eyes
that are as yet blind, and to alarm consciences that now slumber; and
this is a work to be done, not by might and not by power, not by
wrangling and not by wrath, but by the Lord of Hosts pouring out upon our
people a praying spirit, and enduing our beloved Queen with a wise and
understanding heart.

